Let me get through this introduction, then I think
we ought to quit. It's 5.50. Sorry. That's why I
went over. And if we get to drag this out now, we're
talking, aren't we? We'll just edit all of this
out. At
that time, I went over there. The Air Force, the
United States Air Force commander at Saigon was
called a second air division. At the time I was
going over there, it was changed to 7th Air Force. A
little bit before I went over there, it might have
been changed to 7th Air Force. The 13th Air Force
was in the Philippines, and they command
administrative-wise, support-wise, 13th Air
Force in the Philippines. Now, we're going to get
into complex things, so bear with me. They owned
the fighter units based in Thailand. Now, I'm not
talking about the fighter units in South Vietnam.
That was run by the 2nd Air Division and 7th Air
Force. But the 13th Air Force owned and supported
these units in Thailand. My job was to be in Udorn,
the Royal Thai Air Force Base in Udorn, Thailand.
U-D-O-R-N. We were going to set up a headquarters
at the direction of the chief of staff of the Air
Force to a great extent for political and
Air Force military
reasons.
The ranking United States. So what we're doing
then, there was no base before you went. Oh yeah,
these are Thai Air Force. Thailand, there was no
Americans at the base before you went. Oh yeah,
there was an American unit, a fighter unit. That
had been actually a recon unit there. But the
several other Thailand Air Force bases all
belonged to the Royal Thai Air Force. We had
fighter units based there that were doing the
bombing against North Vietnam. And supported by
tankers for air refueling from bases in the
Philippines, and Iwo
Jima. Not Iwo Jima. Okinawa. Okinawa. Then we
built, while I was over there, that's one of the
things that supervised, we built a huge B-52 and
tanker base in southern Thailand and called it, oh
gee, the name. But anyway. I'll think of it. You're
still telling me now why you went over there. Okay.
These forces were all under 13th Air Force. Now,
the Thailand Command directing the war under
General Westmoreland was called United States
Command South Vietnam. There was a United States
Command MacThai, United States Military Command
Thailand, U.S. McTighe, in Bangkok, and the Army
got this job as a slot, commanded by an Army, United
States Army Major General. They had, the United
States Army, had some communications and
logistics type forces at Karat Air Force Base. for
munitions. That's all the army forces that were in
Thailand. Whereas the United States Air Force had
fighter units, F-4s and F-105s at Karat, Ubon,
Udorn, and eventually at Nakhon Pathom, had a
reconnaissance unit at Udorn, and so-called
beret forces, special forces, at Nakhon Phanom. A
hundred times more units and forces than the
United States Army. Yet, the command slot in
Thailand was given to the United States Army. Any
time any politicians or anybody came to Thailand,
actually the Army component commander with his
army hat on would go down and beat them. you know,
this jealousy. Sure. Inter-service rivalry.
Inter-service rivalry that was just
unacceptable as far as the Air Force was
concerned. So... Too much rivalry as far as the Air
Force... Well, I mean, it was unacceptable. The
fact that this man was arming... It was
disproportionate command and
responsibility-wise on the spot. The general
commanding McIntyre forces was... Of course, he
assumed that he'd had response below the other
forces, too, and acted as though he'd command
them, and that irritated him. So there's a lot of
friction between the Army general and the Air
Force general in Thailand. There was no Air Force
general in Thailand. No, not until I got there.
That's what I'm explaining. That's the reason the
position was set up by General McConnell, Chief of
Staff, and the ambassador of Thailand fully
endorsed this. And so did the ambassador at Laos,
Ambassador Graham Martin
in Thailand,
Ambassador I've already given you his name
before. Anyway, they set up and they sent me, and
matter of fact, I was personally briefed by
General McConnell, the Chief of Staff of the Air
Force, in his office before I went as to really what
my job was to be in very general terms.
Essentially, I was to represent the Air Force in
Thailand, and I ranked. the Army general in charge
of MACTI by about a year. And, you know, in services
rank has its privileges and also there's a special
regulation in the armed forces where a
commander junior to a subordinate cannot command
him.
Word to this effect. I was sent over as the, my job,
my title was to be Deputy Commander 7th Air Force
Headquarters. I had five bosses.
The Commander 7th Air Force in Saigon was my boss
from the standpoint of tactical coordination,
where he expected me on the spot for all the fighter
forces, and if you will, air defense also. We had
radar sites manned. by Air Force people with the
Thai people working with Thailand, but from a
strictly Air Force standpoint, the United States
Air Force Department, the Command 7th Air Force,
and wrote his OER on me, Officer Fechner's report
on my performance, in support of coordinating on a
tactical effort. He wrote the FRAG orders. Okay,
so he was your first boss. That's my first boss. was
the commander of 13th Air Force of the Philippines
because he owned and logistically supported all
of this Thailand operation of the United States
Air Force. And I was on the spot commander in
implementing all of that responsibility and, you
know, inspection, supervision, and saying that
it was done and all. My
united, my joint commander, was General
Stilwell, the Commander Bactai, United States
Commander, Military Air Command, Thailand. And
the Joint Command, Chain of Command, he was to be my
commander, but I ranked him. The minute he learned
about me coming over there, even before I left the
United States, he sent a wire through Army
Channel, and it hit Washington, D.C., and he
wanted to know why this was being done. General
McConnell told me about this before he even left,
and I sort of managed it. And he, you know,
indicated to me the problem I was going to have, but
I think you're capable of handling it. I want the
United States Air Force represented in Thailand,
and you're the man I'm sending over there to do it.
When people come over there and land in Bangkok, no
matter where they always land, you beat them. Yes,
sir. I knew what he was getting at. I'd have been
trained. Now, I've talked about three bosses.
Now, it might surprise you to say- What did the Army
say, though, when they received this telegram?
They couldn't do anything about it. They couldn't
do anything about it. This was a United States Air
Force administrative action. Okay, so you're
fourth boss. Fourth boss. Right. My fourth and
fifth bosses were ambassadors. And they acted
like it. Grant Martin, and I got along with both of
them beautifully, but I must admit when I talked to
some of my military bosses, I got my head beat in and
it was a problem. But before we get to Graham
Martin, we're going to talk about him. So you have
five bosses, and your job, regardless of your
title here, which is somewhat confusing, your job
was that you were the senior Air Force officer in
Thailand. On the spot in Thailand. Representing
the Air Force. In other words, you were the senior
Air Force commander in Thailand. I was a senior
United States military commander in Thailand.
Yeah, right. Because you outranked
your so-called boss. And immediately, of course,
this gave the McTighe commander, an Army general,
room to ask for his third star. And what was his
name? General Stilwell. He and I got along all
right. He and I knew what was going on. And we, you
know, sometimes just have to accept the situation
and we got along all right. So you had no problems
with him really? Oh yeah, we had problems. At times
we even had a few words, but we glossed over them and
we got along all right. I have a great respect for
him and I think he had great respect for me. I hope.
But Graham Martin was the ambassador of Thailand
was in effect He sort of acted as a boss in a way,
politically and diplomatically, and also across
the border was Ambassador Bill Sullivan. Okay,
Bill Sullivan. Bill Sullivan was Ambassador to
Laos. Young, very ambitious, and very capable
ambassador. And I found out that even he and Graham
Martin, you know, had their differences. In a
diplomatic world, just like in a military world,
you know, you have people jealous of their
prerogatives and so forth. Can you imagine my
position? Five bosses. I am sure that, looking
over my records, based on the best jobs I had, that
that's the reason General McConnell A terrific
guy, by the way, Chief of Staff. That's the reason
he gave me that job. And to make a long story short,
when I left he rewarded me for the job I did and gave
me commander of a technical air force, the 12th Air
Force. But this was an interesting tour and I would
suggest what we do now is sort of break it down.
OK. You talked about your five boss. Oh, I should
say that this is the 23rd of January, 1981. And this
is our third day of interview. Now, you talked
yesterday afternoon about your five bosses. I'd
like to know about your command at Udorn and how
many airplanes we have there. What was the
mission, the function of the Air Force in
Thailand?
I guess the best way to describe it is that I have to
start with the commander of the entire Southeast
Asian war at that time, General Westmoreland,
commander of the entire American forces, Army,
Navy, and Air Force in the area, reporting
straight back to the front chiefs of staff. But
under him, of course, you had the Air Force
component, the 7th Air Force, which did the air
action for
the Southeast Asian operation, but I hasten to
add, did not control entirely naval air, which is a
point that I think we'll get into later on. But we
attempted many times to get control of naval air,
particularly under General Momar when I was over
there. But under the 7th Air Force, We had air
forces in South Vietnam, of course. But for the
major efforts in striking North Vietnam, in
bombing, if you will, all done by fighters, these
forces were based at several bases in Thailand and
were, to use the vernacular of the military, frag,
fragmentation orders, written, ordering them on
certain flights the following day. All of this was
fragged from 7th Air Force. Now the logistical
support for all these forces in Thailand,
fighters and bombers, fighters and tankers, and
eventually B-52s, were
from the 13th Air Force based in the Philippines.
Well, Clark Air Force Base. It's just the
peculiarities of organization in the Southeast
Asian area. Logistical support came from 13th Air
Force responsibility. Operational control and
fighting the war actually from 7th Air Force in
Saigon. 7th Air Force being a four-star general,
General Mollmeyer at the time. 13th Air Force
being Lieutenant General Jim Wilson at the time.
How do you spell Mollmeyer? M-O-M-M-Y-E-R.
classmate of mine. Terrific, terrific man.
Very controversial, by the way, too, but
terrific.
The fighter forces based at the several bases in
Thailand, Ubon, Udorn, Korat, Takli, and minor
forces at the Khan Phanom, if you will,
the reconnaissance forces based at Boudourne,
and the huge tankers and eventually B-52s based at
the huge base we built during the time I was over
there. And I've got to get the name of this base for
you. I'll probably think of it before the
discussion is over.
These actions were controlled primarily by the
7th Air Force, but I also haste to add, this gets
complicated,
control or both operational and support supply
came over the both the tankers and the b-52s came
down eventually from sac headquarters through
his various sub commands and chain of command
through okinawa to these forces based in thailand
is SAC controlled forces. And here again, SAC
would never give up complete control of these
forces to even the 7th Air Force commander, much
less the 13th Air Force, and much less the unified
commander, General Westmoreland of Southeast
Asia. SAC retained control of these forces. He
couldn't? Westmoreland couldn't get that
control away? Westmoreland requested,
Westmoreland always requested this support, but
of course he got it from SAC. You remember, you've
read about the huge bombings, the carpet bombing
types, the B-52s. Right. General Westmoreland,
as the unified commander for all armed forces in
the United States and Southeast Asia, he
requested these types of strikes in
coordination, really, with SAC planners. But he
didn't order them. But he didn't. Well, let's say
he requested them and Sack fulfilled them. These,
of course, were coordinated really through
Seventh Air Force because the number one air
component, the number one air commander, and this
was basic concepts of Air Force doctrine, and even
Sack admitted this, that there had to be a single
air commander in any theater, and that was
essentially General Volmeyer. But let's say
sometimes this was kind of blinked at at SAC,
because after all, you know, we had SAC, and give
them credit, they had to retain control of their
forces in case of, let's say, a big breakout
someplace else. And remember, these B-52s were
being utilized over there, also had a nuclear
capability. So they had to be, he had to be free to be
able to pull his forces out at any time. He
recognized the requirements of Southeast
Station Bar and General Westmoreland's
requirements, and the Air Force Component
Commander, General Mobar, 7th Air Force. He
recognized their requirements. But it was a
matter of very, sometimes very complicated
coordination, but it got done. And the strikes,
bomber strikes in North Vietnam, were effective.
I say effective.
But we'll get to that. OK. It was a tough task. Now,
that's the way we operated. Now, my job
specifically in Thailand was, as I described to
think earlier, was the on-the-spot Air Force
commander. It was far, far more politically than
it was tactically. Sounds like it. Really,
support-wise, because support, coordination,
and planning went directly from 13th Air Force
Headquarters, really to the bases. I, if you will,
was an explorer, was an on-the-spot implementer,
was an on-the-spot supervisor, and I put out the
fires if I had a problem. I was on the spot in
Thailand. I got the information. I called General
Wilson on the telephone and said, we've got to do
this and do that. I was a... You kept the Air Force
running smoothly in Thailand. I coordinated
problems. And coordinating problems between
five bosses is a difficult problem, to say the
least. As a matter of fact, you might mention at
this time, as typical of my job, It was a tough job. I
wrote a letter to General McConnell after I'd been
over there about two or three months. I wrote a
letter to him because he said, sometime now, if
you're over there, let me know. Write me and let me
know how you're doing and what the problems are. So
I wrote him a letter. It took two or three days, but I
wrote it carefully. But one of my comments in the
letter was that you told me to use my head. I assure
you I have used my head, and I've got a lot of knots on
it. Fortunately, I still have it on my shoulders.
Then I explained why, coordination between five
bosses. And I knew he'd get kicked out of it. As a
matter of fact, I found out later on, Butch, his
deputy chief of staff, I mean his vice chief of
staff at the Air Force, a SAC man, Butch, I think the
name made it wrong. He visited over there and told
me, he said, Charlie, you know the letter you wrote
to General McConnell? I said, yeah. He said, one
day, one morning at staff meeting, he brought that
letter to the staff meeting of his entire staff and
read that part about your head. And he said, I'm
telling you, it cracked up the entire staff. He
said, they've never earned anything for money in
their life because they knew exactly, they knew
exactly what I was talking about. They knew
General Jim Wilson, who was called the alligator.
They knew General Momar. grim, tough, so-and-so.
They knew General Stilwell, died in the World Army
guy, and definitely for the Army, and right in the
middle of this problem of the controversy between
Army and Air Force. They knew Graham Martin, the
ambassador, and they knew little Bill Sullivan,
the very aggressive little ambassador of Laos.
They knew exactly what my problem was. So General
McConnell got quite a kick out of it. But that
exemplifies and explains as an example of really
what my job was. I coordinated. Besides the
coordination, which is always a headache, I would
imagine, were there other problems that you had to
deal with, let's say, as far as keeping equipment
maintained or as far as personnel, maybe drugs or I
don't know, anything to do, any problems that you
had as far as maintenance and personnel and just
living in Thailand and keeping the Thais and the
American airmen good relations, any of those
things? Oh yeah, there's numerous. There were
numerous problems and they varied from day to day.
I might add also, in a way you might say I had a sixth
boss, but I never really concerned myself too much
about it, but this was the chief of staff of the Thai
Air Forces. See all these were Thai, T-H-A-I,
Thailand. All these were Thai bases. We never took
them over. We just used them. And thank goodness we
had that concrete in Thailand. Otherwise, we'd
never been able to get fighters up to bomb North
Vietnam.
I can't remember any great problem about
shortages. We violated many, many Air Force
regulations strictly about building
budgets-wise and dollars. Goodness, the way we
had to build bases over there. We had to do it. I gave
General Wilson credit. Matter of fact, I take my
hat off to him. He didn't let written regulations
stop him. If we needed this base and we needed
something on it, he said build it. For example?
What type of rules and regulations? Well, you have
to get, let's say, certain approval of a certain
amount of money for a certain project normally in
the United States before you can do anything? And
do you have the budget money? Were you within the
budget to do it? And a commander of an air force had
to sign off on a particular thing before even the
staff could proceed, give the base authority to do
it. Of course, we're in a war. Jim didn't worry
about these things. General Wilson didn't worry
about it. I didn't worry about it. But sometimes
when the staff or inspectors from Pentagon come
down through there, well, you know, they'd come to
the surface and there'd be problems. You had to...
talk about. Morale problems amongst the THUD
drivers, if you will, the F-105 aircraft. You
know, we were losing pilots. Never before, never
before has air attacks been made in such dense,
modern surface-to-air missile defenses as was
done by Seventh Air Force fighters. against North
Vietnam. These were Soviet-installed,
Soviet-made, Soviet-installed SAMs, and they
were effective. And we lost pilots. We lost
aircraft to those things. We devised tactics to
get around it. It's just typical of any other
thing. When you come up against advanced
technology, you devise a tactic. Or more
technology, How many pilots do you remember? Do
you remember how many you lost, and what type were
the tactics? How did you get around the SAMs? How
successful were your tactics? We were successful
in getting around them. One of General Momar's
problems as an Air Force commander was, and I take
my hat off to him, should I concentrate on still
tending my attacking forces against the target,
namely, let's say, an air base where fighters are,
a power plant. Should I, right in the middle of a
missile defense in Hanoi, should I continue to do
that? Or since I'm losing aircraft at almost an
unacceptable rate, should I maybe divert some
action against these missile defenses first and
then hit my targets? Well, he stuck to his job. He
continued to hit the targets and bomb them,
because we knew we could always get through any
defenses. But remember, this was the first time we
came up against modern surface-to-air missiles.
So we had to devise tactics, and we devised— First,
how many did you lose? What at times, let's say,
Karat would come back with a force of maybe 25
F-105s. of their base, 24 F-105 from their base,
took off and attacked and come back and five
aircraft and five pilots would be missing that
morning. No kidding. You could lose 25% or 20% in
just one raid? Yep. That afternoon, let's say
maybe we lose three more at one base. This affected
pilot more. No kidding.
The F-105s took the brunt. Those aircraft When
you'd see them take off with as much as 16 bombs
hanging underneath the fighter,
saying that they could go Mach 1, in other words, at
the speed of sound, carrying these bombs, they did
well to climb to 20,000 feet with that bomb load on
them. Sure. The escorting F-4s had to throttle
back to stay with them. not escorting, but I mean
flying with them because they had better
performance.
They had to be refueled for just that flight up to
North Vietnam. By tankers, absolutely. They
couldn't make it because they carried so many
bombs. But it was this type of thing. But to get
around these SAMs was another thing. Okay, now
let's talk about that. Well, we devised, what's
the word we used? I'll have to fill this in for you.
But it was a flight and special-designed
F-105s, two-seater F-105s, where you had an
operator in the back looking at instrumentation
that had been installed in the aircraft to pick up
the launching of a SAM and actually have a strobe to
point where it was coming from. And then having
found out where it was coming from, then the
aircraft would launch a special mission, a
special missile air-to-ground missile called
a—here it is. I can't remember. I have to get the
name of that. You've got me going here. I'll fill in
as we get back. And he had launched this missile,
air-to-ground missile, against the SAM site. In
other words, we suppress the SAMs. At the same
time, the bombers are coming over to drop their
bombs. Okay, so I'm a little lost here. How did you
know the Sands were there? They'd shoot at you.
Okay, but I mean, what you do is sort of, this is not
very military language, but what you do is sort of
send a decoy over? No, our bombers, gradually, as
our bombers were bombing Hanoi, they had to do
something in Hanoi to defend. Their MiGs couldn't
defend against it. Therefore, the Soviets gave
them these missiles, advanced technology. We
didn't know this at first. Well, gee, come back,
you critique. Golly, this missile came by me, and I
saw it actually launch to the ground. Okay, you
build up intelligence. It's SAMs. These are new
things. More of them appeared. We started losing
pilots. We've got to do something about this. So
you've pinpointed on a map where the SAMs were
installed. You always maintain your order of
battle. You know exactly where they are. Okay, and
so then you'd send in a first strike against the
SAMs specifically, try to wipe them out, and then
your bombers would go in right after that. Is that
true? Yes, this is partially true. Okay, well,
explain it to me exactly true. Okay, in addition,
well... As the bombers go in, the fighter bombers,
just preceding their strike is this flight of
either two or four F-105, either to actually
strike the SAM sites when they come up. See, they
have to turn on their radars. When they turn on
their radars to pick up our incoming bombers,
that's when we can pick them up electronically and
our instruments can point them. And we can fire the
missiles out of them. They know this. And they know
when we pick them up by our instrumentation, by
their electronic pickups. So they have got to
decide, am I going to turn my SAM radar equipment on
in order to fire my SAMs and get this incoming
missile from them and knock me out? Or am I going to,
am I going to suffer that loss? Or should I keep my
radars off and not use my SAMs. So it's ECM,
electromagnetic warfare. We suppressed the SAMs
with this flight of, I got to think of the name we
called it, and we had special trained pilots to fly
this. Boy, this was a nerve-wracking flight. Very
nerve-wracking. And these boys got medals one
right after another. But at least they could
identify the missiles and know when they're being
fired, whereas the bomber boys flying the bomber
strike fighters, they might visually see a
missile launch, going and see the... But they
didn't have an electronic tool? No, but they
could... The way the fighter bomber boys knew
whether a missile was coming after them, if they
could see the smoke from the... smoke trail of the
missile, they knew it wasn't going to hit them. And
by the way, they called them telephone poles.
That's about the way they looked when they passed
by and missed you. Looked like a telephone pole.
Long, slim thing. You've seen pictures of it. But
if you couldn't see them, the smoke trail behind
them, that's pretty well, they were coming in your
direction. Now, evasive tactics, and this was a
problem. And rightfully so. If too many of these
things were coming up at you, the air commander
would make the decision to drop your bombs and take
your bases back. In other words, save the airplane
and save your, you know what, get back so we can come
up again, and immediately dive. Turn and dive. So
you dive down? Yeah, dive down. Into them? Well,
dive down, because that's going to bury the...
closing rate of the missile against you and also
you're going to turn which means that the missile
has to to take action the guy to get to you but it also
changes the closing rate of the missile and
therefore it explode above you probably when you
do that and this was the famous favorite survival
tactic turn and dive drop your bombs and when
you've done that of course then You've got all the
garbage off the bottom of your airplane and going
to afterburner up to around Mach 1 because you're
at low altitude, and you've got to get up to speed,
otherwise MIGs catch you. See, the MIGs also in
this that you're confined with, along with the SAM
missiles. This gets complicated, and it gets
ticklish, and it's tough, tough. And this is a
problem we were confined with over there. Now,
what about us? Let's move back just a second here,
and this concerns the North Vietnamese. If we were
having electronic warfare, and as soon as they
turn their radar on, we could pick them up and try to
shoot an air-to-surface missile into them.
Surface to air? No, from our airplane. I'm sorry,
air-to-surface. If we could try to do that, would
they set up dummy radar stations? Well, see,
that's ECM for you. They could, and probably did,
set up some dummy stations. However... And that
was on, and that hit you on the other one? Well, now,
it just takes a while to explain all that. Now, in
addition, in addition over there, we had what were
called ECM aircraft. This is another element of
air power. We had deployed Carat Air Force Base,
Tockley Air Force Base. They were B-66 type
aircraft, a twin-engine jet that had special
electronic equipment on it for picking up any
radar, any electronic mission that you might
have, radar, radio, you name it, in North Vietnam,
as well as these SAMs. And also, they had jamming
equipment in them. Now, this aircraft flew in
coordination with the airstrikes. And they flew
generally at the periphery, around the periphery
of the area. Plus the fact that they had to be
protected to a certain extent sometimes by
escort. We lost a few of these aircraft. And you
see, when they have their jamming equipment on,
this is a perfect target for a SAM. the SAM can home
on that jamming equipment. However, if they're
jamming the frequency of the SAM, then ain't no way
that SAM is going to be able to hit them because he
can't home on them. His direction
radar and direction communication equipment is
jammed. It's useless. In other words, you jam his
guiding equipment. Of course, the ideal thing is
to have these, and I can't think of the name, and
I'll still have to go in. These, I thought of one of
the names. The Shrike was the missile. How do you
spell that? S-H-R-I-K-E. The Shrike was the
missile, air to surface missile, that was carried
by these specially equipped F-105 aircraft from
Takli and Karat that launched this missile
against the SAM sites. The threat of this
aircraft, just by its way it flew, altitude,
tactics and all, the North Vietnamese radar at
their SAM site, they eventually could pick up and
knew exactly what this flight was. They knew it and
could identify it. And a lot of times we found they
chose to stay off the air. They wouldn't even fire
up their radar for their SAM sites. Well, we
achieved success by just suppressing them that
way. Suppressed them. They didn't choose to fire
up because they knew that they'd have a missile
launched against them. The most fatal thing in the
world they could do was fire up and try to fire a
missile against one of these some aircraft that
was carrying a Shrike missile and stay that way,
fired up with all their equipment on, then when we
launched the strike missile, the strike missile
would home in and hit their particular radar site,
their particular SAM site, and destroy them. Of
course, destroy the guiding equipment, radar and
all, and of course, when we do that, we didn't care
whether it destroyed the missile enough because
he couldn't fire it. But, and it got to be a cat and
mouse game. They'd go on and off the air. But the
fact that they knew we had these X-type missiles,
X-type aircraft up there, this was a suppression
in itself. Just the threat of launching a missile
was a threat. Now, if you recall in the later years
of the war, where the B-52s finally were laid on for
mass strikes against North Vietnam,
the first requirement ahead of those B-52s was a
full force of these special equipped F-105 strike
loaded aircraft to hit them. And that's one reason
we didn't lose hardly any B-52.
Now, you said that after evasive action, as far as
the missiles were concerned, Then you had to worry
about the MiGs. Not after, during the same time.
Okay, during the same time. How good were these
MiGs compared to our aircraft? Were they the
MiG-19s or the 21s? Oh, no, MiG-21s, some of the
latest aircraft. How good were the 21s? The MiG-21
was a good airplane. As a matter of fact, it shot
some of our boys down. The F-4... was a good match
for it. The F-105 was not so much, it wasn't as
capable against the MiG as the F-4 was. We learned a
lot about the MiG-21. For instance, I told you
previously that the evasive tactics for the F-105
against not only the missiles, but the MiGs as
well, if they were jumped. And remember they
loaded with bombs. There's no way they could fight
a fighter to drop the bombs and then die. We learned
through intelligence that the MiG-21, at a
certain speed up toward Mach 1, it was very hard to
control. The controls got stiff and almost froze.
We learned that. And that's one of the reasons the
idea was- Was it a slower speed? It was time to
control? Slower than Mach 1. Yeah. That's the
reason the F-105 pilots wanted to get to Mach 1 as
fast as possible, diving and full afterburner.
And then actually go out on the surface of the
ground, going above the speed of sound. And the
mate couldn't catch him because he was
restricted. Now, the F-104, I mean, the F-4 was a
more maneuverable aircraft and more of an
air-to-air type of weapon. And that's one reason
that the F-105s eventually bore the brunt of the
bombing, whereas the F-4s did some bombing. But
they were primarily, let's say, if you will, to
escort a row to fight the MiGs. More F-4s shot down
MiGs by four than F-105s. The MiG-21 is not the
airplane. Our F-4 was . Why not? Explain this. The
F-4 could outmaneuver it and outperform it. Good
airplane. But the main difference was the pilot.
What about armaments, though? Did they both have
air-to-air missiles? Well, definitely we had
air-to-air missiles. Eventually, the MiG-21s
got missiles. But I think the biggest problem was
the capability of the North Vietnamese maintain
and actually fly their... The North Vietnamese
pilots weren't probably as good as the Russian
pilots. Oh, no comparison. No comparison.
There's some evidence that at times some of the
Russian pilots were flying on airplanes, but we
can't prove that. I can't. I don't know for a fact.
What evidence?
Performance of the aircraft against some of our
aircraft. Better maneuverability. better
attack procedures,
launching a missile at a proper time, just
engagement. Techniques of a pilot, you could tell
the difference. Pilot trained. Yeah. But the
MiG-23, which was the airplane, I don't recall any
MiG-23s showing up up there. But
this was tough combat. And getting back to your
basic question that led into all of this, the
problem was, yeah, we had some morale problems. I
had to go down to General Omar's headquarters at
one time with a base commander, one of the base
commanders. I won't mention his name. It finally
came out that it was a matter of moral. You lose your
buddies that many at a time, you know, 20% on each
mission. That makes you think. We had the same
problem in the 8th Air Force in World War II. Sure,
might lose a lot of airplanes. But again, Bomar
stuck to his philosophy. We'll just have to devise
tactics and develop equipment, increase our ECM
and capability against their defenses, but we're
going to hit their targets. And eventually, when
we got the laser-guided bomb, give us far more
accuracy This was a giant stride in our
effectiveness, much greater capability.
Because a lot of times we did screw bombs around,
just plain old tenseness and apprehension about
missiles being fired at you. You can imagine a man
in a fighter plane by himself with about 15, 20
bombs on the bottom of his aircraft, making a pass.
Knowing he's got to drop those bombs, let's say, on
a power plant right in the middle of the city of
Hanoi, which was called flying down the barrel
because it was completely surrounded by
innumerable missile sites, trying to
concentrate on dropping those bombs on that
particular target and pulling out around 12,000
feet, and in the meantime being at perfect
altitude for Sam to hit him take guts, G-U-T-S, it
takes guts. That's for sure. And we lost pilots,
but I take my hat off to them. And we continue to hit
targets. We continue to be very effective. But the
laser bomb really helped. Oh, definitely it
helped. Definitely it helped. And, of course, one
of those bombs, you could pinpoint right on the
target. How effective was that as far as, I mean,
how accurate was it? Oh, we had reconnaissance
pictures where, like I quoted to you previously,
we couldn't